---
title: ewolff.com Imprint
---

Information according to ยง5 TMG: ewolff.com is a private publication
by Eberhard Wolff, Karcherstr. 22, 67655 Kaiserslautern; Email:
eberhard.wolff at posteo dot net.

The use of contact data published within the framework of the imprint
obligation by third parties for sending unsolicited advertising and
informational materials is expressly prohibited. I reserve the right
to take legal action in the case of unsolicited sending of advertising
information, such as through spam emails or postal mail.

All content of ewolff.com is subject to German copyright
law. Reproduction, modification, distribution, and any kind of
exploitation outside the limits of copyright require my written
consent. The content is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

Inserted links were checked by me at the time of insertion. Due to the
nature of the Internet, the content of linked pages may change without
my influence. Therefore, I cannot assume any responsibility for the
content of linked pages. If a linked page has become illegal, I am
grateful for any notification. I will then remove the link.

This imprint clearly indicates the publisher's location and the fact
that it is a private publication. Therefore, please accept
Kaiserslautern as the place of jurisdiction for all disputes related
to this website.

I do not guarantee the timeliness, correctness, completeness, or
quality of the information provided. Liability claims related to
damages of a material or immaterial nature caused by the use or
non-use of the presented information or by the use of incorrect or
incomplete information are fundamentally excluded.

All offers are non-binding and without obligation. I expressly reserve
the right to change, supplement, delete parts of the website or the
entire offer without separate announcement, or to temporarily or
permanently cease publication.
