---
title: The Dunbar Myth - Primates and Software Teams
layout: blog
description: Software development teams are social systems, just like those formed by other primates. So, what can we learn from these primates?
tags:
- Dunbar's Number
- Organization
---

The way humans form social organizations impacts our industry, raising
questions about the ideal size for a team or company. [Dunbar's
number](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunbar%27s_number), often cited
as 150, is commonly referenced as the size of a group humans fell
comfortable with. However, this interpretation is simply
incorrect. [Dunbar's original scientific
publication](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/behavioral-and-brain-sciences/article/abs/coevolution-of-neocortical-size-group-size-and-language-in-humans/4290FF4D7362511136B9A15A96E74FEF)
says something entirely different.

Dunbar studied non-human primates. He found a correlation between the
volume of their neocortex - a part of the brain - and the size of the
groups they form. From this data, Dunbar extrapolated a group size of
147.8 for humans. As with all scientific findings, there's a margin of
error: with 95% probability, the group size lies between 100.2 and
231.1. [Another
paper](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rsbl.2021.0158),
however, suggested a completely different range, with a confidence
intervals from 3.8 to 292.0. This research also presents some other
data analyses, all of which offer confidence intervals ranging from
single digits to several hundred. Based on this, the Dunbar's number
has no practical value.

## Language instead of Social Grooming

But Dunbar's primary focus wasn’t the number. In groups, primates
engage in social grooming not only to remove parasites but also to
strengthen social bonds. Dunbar highlighted the relationship between
the time spent with social grooming and the size of the primate
group. Larger groups need more social grooming. For the size of human
groups, the time needed for social grooming would be unfeasible,
leading Dunbar to suggest that humans developed language as a more
efficient way to maintain social cohesion. Thus, in his opinion
language didn't evolve for hunting or tool-making, as other scientists
have proposed, but to nurture social relationships.

In other words, Dunbar's central thesis is not the size of the group
but that human language evolved to strengthen social bonds.

Dunbar's number of 150 is just the extrapolated maximum size for
human groups that use language as a process analogous to social
grooming. He mentions clans or villages in this context. He also
describes other groups: "bands" with 30 to 50 members and "tribes" or
"subtribes" with 1,000 to 2,000 people.

Thus, Dunbar's paper discusses a variety of human group sizes - not
just one. Groups significantly different from 150 simply belong to
another category. His thesis isn’t about the group size per se but
about the mechanisms a group uses to sustain itself—and he clearly
states this.

One interesting point: Dunbar sees military groups as supporting his
thesis, noting that the military has groups of 100 to 200
members. However, there are also much smaller military units, like a
squad (2 to 8 soldiers in the German army), or larger ones, like a
battalion (300 to 1,200 soldiers), which he doesn’t examine further.

There is extensive criticism of Dunbar’s paper from other scientists,
so virtually every part of has been debated. For example, the group
size findings are challenged by evidence of fission-fusion groups
among primates. In these groups, individuals join and leave, sometimes
sleeping together in one place but spending the day apart. Such groups
are temporary, and species with this behavior require less social
grooming time, often forming larger groups. So actually primates can
form large groups without complex human language.

## Why Is Dunbar's Number So Interesting?

For organizing human teams, Dunbar's number is not helpful. Dunbar
himself states that human groups can be practically of any size. You
don't even need to read the extensive critiques to reach this
conclusion.

The critiques also raise other interesting points. For example, it’s
unclear why the number of people a person knows would affect group
size. Even if we only know a limited number of people and speak to
them regularly, a group can still be much larger. It’s enough for
people to act in coordinated ways. Thanks to language, humans can
coordinate on a large scale, up to nations and beyond. It's obvious
that we have different levels of familiarity and trust with different
people. We leverage this in daily work: instead of giving information
directly to someone, we might ask a third person to do it because they
have a better relationship with that person.

## Reason for the Misinterpretation

To me, the misinterpretation of the Dunbar's number reflects a deeper
problem: human and social behavior is oversimplified. In the end, we
get a number that supposedly represents the ideal group size — an easy
rule to follow.

But intuition should tell us otherwise. Everyone knows from their own
experience that people can operate in groups of different sizes — in
both private and professional contexts: the company, clubs, the
neighborhood, friends, family. These groups vary in size. For
particularly large groups, there are hierarchies, like in the
military, but also in companies, with teams, departments, and
offices.

These groups often don’t last long. For example, during a training or
the first consulting meeting, trainers and consultants work with a
group they’ve never met before — and it works. This is obviously a
different group dynamic than with one’s family, but such groups have
different goals.

You could argue that trust grows over time. But trust can also form
quickly: when a patient is admitted to the hospital, they may entrust
their life to the treating doctor, even though they’ve never met them
before.

Certainly, Dunbar’s research can serve as inspiration for thinking
about mechanisms that strengthen group cohesion. His thesis is that
language evolved to strengthen social bonds, and he provides
statistics on how much time people spend talking about social
relationships and gossip. Measures to strengthen team cohesion, like
informal conversations, can be useful. Where does your team have such
a forum? It doesn’t have to be a team-building events; something
like a regular shared lunch can serve the same purpose.

## tl;dr

Dunbar's number doesn't tell us anything about the ideal size for
teams or companies. They can be any size and structured in different
ways. The misinterpretation of the number suggests that our industry
is susceptible to oversimplifications that even contradict
intuition. Teams need a mechanism to foster social cohesion.

*This is a translation of my [German blog post at heise
Developer](https://www.heise.de/blog/Was-Softwareentwicklungsteams-mit-der-Dunbar-Zahl-und-Primaten-zu-tun-haben-9825599.html).*
