---
title: "Bringing Ideas into an Organization - Fearless Change Patterns and the Fearless Journey Game"
layout: blog
description: Software development happens in teams. That means every idea or change affects many people. So everyone involved – including technical staff – must contribute their ideas to the organization. Fearless Change and Fearless Journey offer the tools to do just that.
tags:
- Software Development
- Sociotechnical
- Fearless Change
- Fearless Journey
---

If you work in IT projects, sooner or later you’ll realize that many
problems can be solved informally – just like in other areas of
life. If you ask nicely, people will help you. It's not uncommon for
someone to solve a critical project issue while chatting at the coffee
machine. When things are unclear, people tend to talk directly – in
person, via video call, or on the phone – rather than writing an email
and risking misunderstandings. And a private one-on-one conversation
often helps when someone’s behavior in a large meeting is hard to
understand. As helpful as these informal approaches are, they’re not
enough to systematically introduce an idea into a company – that
requires more than just one successful conversation.

In a [previous
post](/2025/03/25/whos-in-control-the-hidden-influence-of-software-developers-and-architects.html),
we discussed how formal decisions can be undermined. We also know many
ways how this happens. This leads to two consequences:

* Even when someone makes a formal decision, they depend on the
  organization not to sabotage it informally. In other words:
  decision-makers can’t work against the organization, even if they
  appear to have the authority to make arbitrary choices.

* Informal mechanisms can also be used not to sabotage, but to support
  decisions. People who understand how to use these mechanisms can
  effectively drive decisions in the organization – even if they
  aren’t formally allowed to make them.

## Decisions, Ideas, and Architecture

For technical staff, understanding how an organization makes decisions
is essential – because software architecture involves decisions about
technologies and code structure. These decisions involve developers,
architects, and management alike. Being able to contribute to these
processes helps increase your own effectiveness. These decisions
especially impact developers and architects, who must live with them
and may later be held accountable for the success or failure of a
project that depended on them. That’s another strong reason to
influence those decisions.

So the ability to moderate or influence decisions is key for technical
staff. It’s not enough to recognize the best option – you have to make
it happen. And informal approaches are especially valuable in that
effort. 

## Fearless Change: Structuring Informal Action

What’s needed is a structured approach to using informal mechanisms to
bring ideas into an organization. One-on-one conversations and chats
at the coffee machine are certainly useful, but they’re not a complete
solution.

[*Fearless Change*](https://fearlesschangepatterns.com/) offers a
collection of patterns for exactly this. It’s based on two books by
Mary Lynn Manns and Linda Rising: *"Fearless Change – Patterns for
Introducing Ideas"* and *"More Fearless Change – Strategies for Making
Your Ideas Happen"*.

One such pattern is **"Token"**: "To keep a new idea alive in a
person’s memory, hand out tokens that can be identified with the topic
being introduced." I believe Linda Rising once used this pattern on
me. Over fifteen years ago, I attended a Fearless Change workshop with
her, where she handed out index cards with the patterns on them. I
still have those cards – sometimes I see them lying around and they
remind me of the patterns. Someone else once gave me wooden chips
labeled ["Innovation Tokens"](https://boringtechnology.club/). I still
remember that idea too. Clearly, the "Token" pattern helps anchor an
idea – and it’s a completely different approach than chatting by the
coffee machine.

Another pattern is **"Study Group"**: "Form a small group of
colleagues who are interested in exploring or continuing to learn
about a specific topic." This can be useful for introducing techniques
like Domain-driven Design or Microservices. Beyond learning the
content itself, you also form a group with a shared interest – people
who care enough to engage with the idea. That group can be helpful for
future initiatives too.

Following the pattern **"Step by Step,"** a Study Group might be a
first (or second?) step, which could then lead to a prototype
implementation and eventually a **"Hometown Story"** – a story about
an internal success with the idea, which can help spread it to other
teams.

There are also communication patterns:
* **"Whisper in the General’s Ear"** means convincing a manager in a
  confidential setting.
* **"Royal Audience"** means organizing a meeting between management
  and employees with a well-known figure who embodies the idea and can
  promote it.

## Fearless Journey: A Game for Innovation

You could just buy the books, study the patterns, and create a plan
for applying them to your situation. But there’s a playful
alternative: [Fearless Journey](https://fearlessjourney.info/), a card
game that helps a group plan Fearless Change together.

First, you define a goal – like introducing Domain-driven Design in
your organization. The goal should be a real challenge. Then, players
collect the obstacles and blockers standing in the way. Each player
receives a set of strategy cards from Fearless Change. During the
game, players solve the gathered problems using these strategy
cards. One or more players can play one or several strategies to solve
each problem – unless someone vetoes the solution, arguing the
strategies are unsuitable.

The result of the game is a plan for solving the problems involved in
introducing the idea – using Fearless Change patterns. These patterns
can be used by anyone in the organization. In other words: you don’t
need to rely on management – you can drive change yourself. Of course,
management can also use the game to develop strategies with others.

Even more important is the social outcome: a group has formed and
already started working together on introducing the idea. That group
will likely remain engaged in the initiative. The game fosters
cooperation – everyone solves problems with their strategies, which
emphasizes collaboration. Because problems are only unresolved if
someone vetoes the proposed solution, vetoes are rare – this leads to
a constructive and positive atmosphere. By the end, most problems have
a solution, making it easier to take the next steps. If some problems
remain, that’s also useful – because it makes clear which issues still
need attention.

Politics doesn’t have to be boring – it can be fun and useful.
Interested in the game? You can download it for free or
order it from the [website](https://fearlessjourney.info/), a card
game that helps a group plan Fearless Change together.

First, you define a goal – like introducing Domain-driven Design in
your organization. The goal should be a real challenge. Then, players
collect the obstacles and blockers standing in the way. Each player
receives a set of strategy cards from Fearless Change. During the
game, players solve the gathered problems using these strategy
cards. One or more players can play one or several strategies to solve
each problem – unless someone vetoes the solution, arguing the
strategies are unsuitable.

The result of the game is a plan for solving the problems involved in
introducing the idea – using Fearless Change patterns. These patterns
can be used by anyone in the organization. In other words: you don’t
need to rely on management – you can drive change yourself. Of course,
management can also use the game to develop strategies with others.

Even more important is the social outcome: a group has formed and
already started working together on introducing the idea. That group
will likely remain engaged in the initiative. The game fosters
cooperation – everyone solves problems with their strategies, which
emphasizes collaboration. Because problems are only unresolved if
someone vetoes the proposed solution, vetoes are rare – this leads to
a constructive and positive atmosphere. By the end, most problems have
a solution, making it easier to take the next steps. If some problems
remain, that’s also useful – because it makes clear which issues still
need attention.

Politics doesn’t have to be boring – it can be fun and useful.
Interested in the game? You can download it for free or order it from
the [website](https://fearlessjourney.info/). And you can watch
[Software Architektur im
Stream](https://software-architektur.tv/2024/09/27/episode233.html) to
see how Tanja Friedel, Ralf D. Müller, and I play Fearless Journey and
reflect on the experience (only in German, sorry!).

## Conclusion

The Fearless Change patterns give technical staff a toolkit to
influence decisions – such as software architecture – through informal
means, without needing formal authority. That can make their work
easier. But it also means that you don’t have to passively accept
decisions just because someone higher up made them. You can – and
should – advocate for your ideas, especially if you believe that bad
decisions could cause serious harm. In that case, technical staff
can’t just hide behind management. They must actively work to
implement better ideas within the organization.

*This is a translation of my [German article at Java
Magazin](https://entwickler.de/reader/reading/java-magazin/2.2025/de2d846e2b6dfd9128476b1f).*
