---
title: Will AI Replace Developers?
layout: blog
description: Artificial intelligence could trigger a massive leap in software development productivity. What impact might this have?
tags:
- AI
- Software Development
---

Let’s assume we manage to improve productivity in software development
by an order of magnitude — so by a factor of ten. To make this more
concrete, consider a thought experiment: A project manager wakes up
one morning and realizes that her project now requires only 10 people
instead of 100. She also knows exactly who those 10 people are. This
is as certain to her as the sky being blue.

What will the project manager do?

One option is to continue the project with just 10 people and either
reassign or lay off the remaining 90. However, implementing this is
difficult because it means admitting that too many people were working
on the project in the first place. Moreover, managing a 100-person
project carries more prestige than leading a team of only 10. There’s
also a risk: once these employees are let go, it may not be easy to
bring them back if a new need arises.

Another option is to let the 10 people work on the original project
while assigning the others new tasks. This could involve expanding the
project’s scope, which is often feasible since the demand for
additional features is common. Alternatively, the excess staff could
be assigned to a different project. Both approaches ultimately
generate more value for the organization and, consequently, more
prestige for those involved.

Perhaps the additional staff could accelerate the project, but this is
unlikely. Adding people to a project can actually slow it down due to
the increased need for onboarding and communication. Fred Brooks
pointed this out in his book The Mythical Man-Month.

## Realistic?

But is such a thought experiment even realistic? Fred Brooks had an
answer to this as well: In his paper ["No Silver
Bullet"](https://software-architektur.tv/2024/02/02/folge201.html), he
argued that no single measure can improve software development
productivity by an order of magnitude. However, he left room for the
possibility that a combination of measures might achieve this. And,
much like this blog post, his statement was a hypothesis rather than a
proven fact.

One reason the scenario might actually be realistic: As mentioned
earlier, larger teams bring more prestige, creating an incentive to
structure projects around many people. Parkinson’s Law states that
work expands to fill the time available, and similarly, available
employees tend to be assigned to projects. Given that software
development is highly communication-intensive, a bloated team can lead
to communication bottlenecks. Since communication structures influence
software architecture (as per Conway’s Law), excessive complexity can
lead to architectural breakdowns. Conway also suggested that inflated
projects with poor communication result in poor architecture.

Thus, a leaner team with a well-structured architecture and fewer
communication hurdles might achieve the same results just as
quickly. Perhaps this thought experiment isn’t entirely unrealistic
after all.

## Artificial Intelligence?

The real motivator for this thought experiment is a different trend:
AI could significantly boost coding efficiency, as discussed [in
another blog
post](/2024/10/29/ai-in-software-development-overhyped.html). This
raises an important question: What happens if coding productivity increases
tenfold?

The thought experiment suggests that even with such a boost, more
software would likely be produced rather than fewer developers being
needed. As a result, software could be applied to areas where it
currently isn’t economically viable.

Economics has a name for this phenomenon: the [rebound
effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rebound_effect_(conservation)). When
cars become more fuel-efficient, for example, they are driven more,
potentially increasing overall fuel consumption. AI might lead to a
similar effect: Software development becomes more efficient, but as
software is deployed in more domains, the total effort spent on it
remains the same. Indeed, software is already permeating more areas,
and AI could accelerate this trend.

In the extreme case, people without traditional programming skills
might be able to develop software. This promise has surfaced before
with technologies like COBOL, as well as low-code and no-code
platforms. But even if AI succeeds in democratizing software
development, history suggests certain outcomes. Desktop publishing,
for instance, allowed far more people to create printed materials
compared to the 1980s, but while accessibility increased, overall
quality often declined. Meanwhile, professionals in the field continue
to find work.

This might suggest that the software industry is shielded from
AI-driven disruption. But the future remains unpredictable. One could
argue that the current downturn in the IT job market is just a prelude
to what AI might bring. The future is open.

## tl;dr

Even if AI boosts software development productivity tenfold, it won’t
necessarily reduce the number of people working in the field. Instead,
it’s more likely to expand software’s reach into even more domains.

*This is a translation of my [German blog post at heise
Developer](https://www.heise.de/blog/Fuehrt-KI-zu-mehr-arbeitslosen-Entwicklern-oder-zu-mehr-Softwareproduktion-10189960.html).*
